How do you glue loose desert sand into a solid crust?
You grow the glue in place, out of thin air.
An engineered enzyme called carbonic anhydrase captures carbon dioxide
and, in water, converts it into carbonate ions.
Meanwhile the sand supplies calcium. Positive calcium
and negative carbonate attract, and lock together.
Once the water is over-saturated — when this ratio climbs above one
— the calcium carbonate can no longer stay dissolved. It crystallises.
The fresh crystals grow at the contact points
between grains, bridging them into one cemented mass.
But there is a twist most models ignore. This
enzyme route does not make hard limestone right away.
It first makes a softer, unstable crystal called vaterite.
Over the following hours vaterite slowly rearranges into strong, durable calcite
— so the crust literally keeps getting harder as it ages.
And because each carbonate came from carbon dioxide, every
gram of crust also captures a little climate co-benefit.